                 ***** Industrial Society and its Future *****
                 (Manifesto of FC--the Unabomber -- 2nd part)
return_to_1st_part
**** REVOLUTION IS EASIER THAN REFORM ****
140. We hope we have convinced the reader that the system cannot be reformed in
such a way as to reconcile freedom with technology. The only way out is to
dispense with the industrialtechnological system altogether. This implies
revolution, not necessarily an armed uprising, but certainly a radical and
fundamental change in the nature of society. 141. People tend to assume that
because a revolution involves a much greater change than reform does, it is
more difficult to bring about than reform is. Actually, under certain
circumstances revolution is much easier than reform. The reason is that a
revolutionary movement can inspire an intensity of commitment that a reform
movement cannot inspire. A reform movement merely offers to solve a particular
social problem. A revolutionary movement offers to solve all problems at one
stroke and create a whole new world; it provides the kind of ideal for which
people will take great risks and make great sacrifices. For this reasons it
would be much easier to overthrow the whole technological system than to put
effective, permanent restraints on the development or application of any one
segment of technology, such as genetic engineering, for example. Not many
people will devote themselves with single-minded passion to imposing and
maintaining restraints on genetic engineering, but under suitable conditions
large numbers of people may devote themselves passionately to a revolution
against the industrial-technological system. As we noted in paragraph 132,
reformers seeking to limit certain aspects of technology would be working to
avoid a negative outcome. But revolutionaries work to gain a powerful reward -
- fulfillment of their revolutionary vision and therefore work harder and more
persistently than reformers do.
142. Reform is always restrained by the fear of painful consequences if changes
go too far. But once a revolutionary fever has taken hold of a society, people
are willing to undergo unlimited hardships for the sake of their revolution.
This was clearly shown in the French and Russian Revolutions. It may be that in
such cases only a minority of the population is really committed to the
revolution, but this minority is sufficiently large and active so that it
becomes the dominant force in society. We will have more to say about
revolution in paragraphs 180-205.

**** CONTROL OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR ****
143. Since the beginning of civilization, organized societies have had to put
pressures on human beings of the sake of the functioning of the social
organism. The kinds of pressures vary greatly from one society to another. Some
of the pressures are physical (poor diet, excessive labor, environmental
pollution), some are psychological (noise, crowding, forcing human behavior
into the mold that society requires). In the past, human nature has been
approximately constant, or at any rate has varied only within certain bounds.
Consequently, societies have been able to push people only up to certain
limits. When the limit of human endurance has been passed, things start going
wrong: rebellion, or crime, or corruption, or evasion of work, or depression
and other mental problems, or an elevated death rate, or a declining birth rate
or something else, so that either the society breaks down, or its functioning
becomes too inefficient and it is (quickly or gradually, through conquest,
attrition or evolution) replaced by some more efficient form of society. [25]
144. Thus human nature has in the past put certain limits on the development of
societies. People could be pushed only so far and no farther. But today this
may be changing, because modern technology is developing ways of modifying
human beings.
145. Imagine a society that subjects people to conditions that make them
terribly unhappy, then gives them drugs to take away their unhappiness. Science
fiction? It is already happening to some extent in our own society. It is well
known that the rate of clinical depression has been greatly increasing in
recent decades. We believe that this is due to disruption of the power process,
as explained in paragraphs 59-76. But even if we are wrong, the increasing rate
of depression is certainly the result of SOME conditions that exist in today's
society. Instead of removing the conditions that make people depressed, modern
society gives them antidepressant drugs. In effect, antidepressants are a means
of modifying an individual's internal state in such a way as to enable him to
tolerate social conditions that he would otherwise find intolerable. (Yes, we
know that depression is often of purely genetic origin. We are referring here
to those cases in which environment plays the predominant role.)
146. Drugs that affect the mind are only one example of the new methods of
controlling human behavior that modern society is developing. Let us look at
some of the other methods.
147. To start with, there are the techniques of surveillance. Hidden video
cameras are now used in most stores and in many other places, computers are
used to collect and process vast amounts of information about individuals.
Information so obtained greatly increases the effectiveness of physical
coercion (i.e., law enforcement). [26] Then there are the methods of
propaganda, for which the mass communication media provide effective vehicles.
Efflcient techniques have been developed for winning elections, selling
products, influencing public opinion. The entertainment industry serves as an
important psychological tool of the system, possibly even when it is dishing
out large amounts of sex and violence. Entertainment provides modern man with
an essential means of escape. While absorbed in television, videos, etc., he
can forget stress, anxiety, frustration, dissatisfaction. Many primitive
peoples, when they don't have work to do, are quite content to sit for hours at
a time doing nothing at all, because they are at peace with themselves and
their world. But most modern people must be constantly occupied or entertained,
otherwise they get "bored," i.e., they get fidgety, uneasy, irritable.
148. Other techniques strike deeper than the foregoing. Education is no longer
a simple affair of paddling a kid's behind when he doesn't know his lessons and
patting him on the head when he does know them. It is becoming a scientific
technique for controlling the child's development. Sylvan Learning Centers, for
example, have had great success in motivating children to study, and
psychological techniques are also used with more or less success in many
conventional schools. "Parenting" techniques that are taught to parents are
designed to make children accept fundamental values of the system and behave in
ways that the system finds desirable. "Mental health" programs, "intervention"
techniques, psychotherapy and so forth are ostensibly designed to benefit
individuals, but in practice they usually serve as methods for inducing
individuals to think and behave as the system requires. (There is no
contradiction here; an individual whose attitudes or behavior bring him into
conflict with the system is up against a force that is too powerful for him to
conquer or escape from, hence he is likely to suffer from stress, frustration,
defeat. His path will be much easier if he thinks and behaves as the system
requires. In that sense the system is acting for the benefit of the individual
when it brainwashes him into conformity.) Child abuse in its gross and obvious
forms is disapproved in most if not all cultures. Tormenting a child for a
trivial reason or no reason at all is something that appalls almost everyone.
But many psychologists interpret the concept of abuse much more broadly. Is
spanking, when used as part of a rational and consistent system of discipline,
a form of abuse? The question will ultimately be decided by whether or not
spanking tends to produce behavior that makes a person fit in well with the
existing system of society. In practice, the word "abuse" tends to be
interpreted to include any method of child-rearing that produces behavior
inconvenient for the system. Thus, when they go beyond the prevention of
obvious, senseless cruelty, programs for preventing "child abuse" are directed
toward the control of human behavior on behalf of the system.
149. Presumably, research will continue to increase the effectiveness of
psychological techniques for controlling human behavior. But we think it is
unlikely that psychological techniques alone will be sufficient to adjust human
beings to the kind of society that technology is creating. Biological methods
probably will have to be used. We have already mentioned the use of drugs in
this connection. Neurology may provide other avenues for modifying the human
mind. Genetic engineering of human beings is already beginning to occur in the
form of "gene therapy," and there is no reason to assume that such methods will
not eventually be used to modify those aspects of the body that affect mental
functioning.
150. As we mentioned in paragraph 134, industrial society seems likely to be
entering a period of severe stress, due in part to problems of human behavior
and in part to economic and environmental problems. And a considerable
proportion of the system's economic and environmental problems result from the
way human beings behave. Alienation, low self-esteem, depression, hostility,
rebellion; children who won't study, youth gangs, illegal drug use, rape, child
abuse, other crimes, unsafe sex, teen pregnancy, population growth, political
corruption, race hatred, ethnic rivalry, bitter ideological conflict (e.g.,
pro-choice vs. pro-life), political extremism, terrorism, sabotage, anti-
government groups, hate groups. All these threaten the very survival of the
system. The system will therefore be FORCED to use every practical means of
controlling human behavior.
151. The social disruption that we see today is certainly not the result of
mere chance. It can only be a result of the conditions of life that the system
imposes on people. (We have argued that the most important of these conditions
is disruption of the power process.) If the systems succeeds in imposing
sufficient control over human behavior to assure its own survival, a new
watershed in human history will have been passed. Whereas formerly the limits
of human endurance have imposed limits on the development of societies (as we
explained in Paragraphs 143, 144), industrial-technological society will be
able to pass those limits by modifying human beings, whether by psychological
methods or biological methods or both. In the future, social systems will not
be adjusted to suit the needs of human beings. Instead, human being will be
adjusted to suit the needs of the system. [27]
152. GeneraUy speaking, technological control over human behavior will probably
not be introduced with a totalitarian intention or even through a conscious
desire to restrict human freedom. [28] Each new step in the assertion of
control over the human mind will be taken as a rational response to a problem
that faces society, such as curing alcoholism, reducing the crime rate or
inducing young people to study science and engineering. In many cases there
will be a humanitarian justification. For example, when a psychiatrist
prescribes an anti-depressant for a depressed patient, he is clearly doing that
individual a favor. It would be inhumane to withhold the drug from someone who
needs it. When Parents send their children to Sylvan Learning Centers to have
them manipulated into becoming enthusiastic about their studies, they do so
from concern for their children's welfare. It may be that some of these parents
wish that one didn't have to have specialized training to get a job and that
their kid didn't have to be brainwashed into becoming a computer nerd. But what
can they do? They can't change society, and their child may be unemployable if
he doesn't have certain skills. So they send him to Sylvan.
153. Thus control over human behavior will be introduced not by a calculated
decision of the authorities but through a process of social evolution (RAPID
evolution, however). The process will be impossible to resist, because each
advance, considered by itself, will appear to be beneficial, or at least the
evil involved in making the advance will appear to be beneficial, or at least
the evil involved in making the advance will seem to be less than that which
would result from not making it (see paragraph 127). Propaganda for example is
used for many good purposes, such as discouraging child abuse or race hatred.
[14] Sex education is obviously useful, yet the effect of sex education (to the
extent that it is successful) is to take the shaping of sexual attitudes away
from the family and put it into the hands of the state as represented by the
public school system.
154. Suppose a biological trait is discovered that increases the likelihood
that a child will grow up to be a criminal, and suppose some sort of gene
therapy can remove this trait. [29] Of course most parents whose children
possess the trait will have them undergo the therapy. It would be inhumane to
do otherwise, since the child would probably have a miserable life if he grew
up to be a criminal. But many or most primitive societies have a low crime rate
in comparison with that of our society, even though they have neither high-tech
methods of child-rearing nor harsh systems of punishment. Since there is no
reason to suppose that more modern men than primitive men have innate predatory
tendencies, the high crime rate of our society must be due to the pressures
that modern conditions put on people, to which many cannot or will not adjust.
Thus a treatment designed to remove potential criminal tendencies is at least
in part a way of re-engineering people so that they suit the requirements of
the system.
155. Our society tends to regard as a "sickness" any mode of thought or
behavior that is inconvenient for the system, and this is plausible because
when an individual doesn't fit into the system it causes pain to the individual
as well as problems for the system. Thus the manipulation of an individual to
adjust him to the system is seen as a "cure" for a "sickness" and therefore as
good.
156. In paragraph 127 we pointed out that if the use of a new item of
technology is INITIALLY optional, it does not necessarily REMAIN optional,
because the new technology tends to change society in such a way that it
becomes difficult or impossible for an individual to function without using
that technology. This applies also to the technology of human behavior. In a
world in which most children are put through a program to make them
enthusiastic about studying, a parent will almost be forced to put his kid
through such a program, because if he does not, then the kid will grow up to
be, comparatively speaking, an ignoramus and therefore unemployable. Or suppose
a biological treatment is discovered that, without undesirable side-effects,
will greatly reduce the psychological stress from which so many people suffer
in our society. If large numbers of people choose to undergo the treatment,
then the general level of stress in society will be reduced, so that it will be
possible for the system to increase the stress-producing pressures. In fact,
something like this seems to have happened already with one of our society's
most important psychological tools for enabling people to reduce (or at least
temporarily escape from) stress, namely, mass entertainment (see paragraph
147). Our use of mass entertainment is "optional": No law requires us to watch
television, listen to the radio, read magazines. Yet mass entertainment is a
means of escape and stress-reduction on which most of us have become dependent.
Everyone complains about the trashiness of television, but almost everyone
watches it. A few have kicked the TV habit, but it would be a rare person who
could get along today without using ANY form of mass entertainment. (Yet until
quite recently in human histo}y most people got along very nicely with no other
entertainment than that which each local community created for itself.) Without
the entertainment industry the system probably would not have been able to get
away with putting as much stressproducing pressure on us as it does.
157. Assuming that industrial society survives, it is likely that technology
will eventually acquire something approaching complete control over human
behavior. It has been established beyond any rational doubt that human thought
and behavior have a largely biological basis. As experimenters have
demonstrated, feelings such as hunger, pleasure, anger and fear can be turned
on and off by electrical stimulation of appropriate parts of the brain.
Memories can be destroyed by damaging parts of the brain or they can be brought
to the surface by electrical stimulation. Hallucinations can be induced or
moods changed by drugs. There may or may not be an immaterial human soul, but
if there is one it clearly is less powerful that the biological mechanisms of
human behavior. For if that were not the case then researchers would not be
able so easily to manipulate human feelings and behavior with drugs and
electrical currents.
158. It presumably would be impractical for all people to have electrodes
inserted in their heads so that they could be controlled by the authorities.
But the fact that human thoughts and feelings are so open to biological
intervention shows that the problem of controlling human behavior is mainly a
technical problem; a problem of neurons, hormones and complex molecules; the
kind of problem that is accessible to scientific attack. Given the outstanding
record of our society in solving technical problems, it is overwhelmingly
probable that great advances will be made in the control of human behavior.
159. Will public resistance prevent the introduction of technological control
of human behavior? It certainly would if an attempt were made to introduce such
control all at once. But since technological control will be introduced through
a long sequence of small advances, there will be no rational and effective
public resistance. (See paragraphs 127, 132, 153.)
160. To those who think that all this sounds like science fiction, we point out
that yesterday's science fiction is today's fact. The Industrial Revolution has
radically altered man's environment and way of life, and it is only to be
expected that as technology is increasingly applied to the human body and mind,
man himself will be altered as radically as his environment and way of life
have been.

**** HUMAN RACE AT A CROSSROADS ****
161. But we have gotten ahead of our story. It is one thing to develop in the
laboratory a series of psychological or biological techniques for manipulating
human behavior and quite another to integrate these techniques into a
functioning social system. The latter problem is the more difficult of the two.
For example, while the techniques of educational psychology doubtless work
quite well in the "lab schools" where they are developed, it is not necessarily
easy to apply them effectively throughout our educational system. We all know
what many of our schools are like. The teachers are too busy taking knives and
guns away from the kids to subject them to the latest techniques for making
them into computer nerds. Thus, in spite of all its technical advances relating
to human behavior, the system to date has not been impressively successful in
controlling human beings. The people whose behavior is fairly well under the
control of the system are those of the type that might be called "bourgeois."
But there are growing numbers of people who in one way or another are rebels
against the system: welfare leaches, youth gangs, cultists. satanists, nazis,
radical environmentalists, militiamen, etc.
162. The system is currently engaged in a desperate struggle to overcome
certain problems that threaten its survival, among which the problems of human
behavior are the most important. If the system succeeds in acquiring sufficient
control over human behavior quickly enough, it will probably survive. Otherwise
it will break down. We think the issue will most likely be resolved within the
next several decades, say 40 to 100 years.
163. Suppose the system survives the crisis of the next several decades. By
that time it will have to have solved, or at least brought under control, the
principal problems that confront it, in particular that of "socializing" human
beings; that is, making people sufficiently docile so that heir behavior no
longer threatens the system. That being accomplished, it does not appear that
there would be any further obstacle to the development of technology, and it
would presumably advance toward its logical conclusion, which is complete
control over everything on Earth, including human beings and all other
important organisms. The system may become a unitary, monolithic organization,
or it may be more or less fragmented and consist of a number of organizations
coexisting in a relationship that includes elements of both cooperation and
competition, just as today the government, the corporations and other large
organizations both cooperate and compete with one another. Human freedom mostly
will have vanished, because individuals and small groups will be impotent vis-
a-vis large organizations armed with supertechnology and an arsenal of advanced
psychological and biological tools for manipulating human beings, besides
instruments of surveillance and physical coercion. Only a small number of
people will have any real power, and even these probably will have only very
limited freedom, because their behavior too will be regulated; just as today
our politicians and corporation executives can retain their positions of power
only as long as their behavior remains within certain fairly narrow limits.
164. Don't imagine that the systems will stop developing further techniques for
controlling human beings and nature once the crisis of the next few decades is
over and increasing control is no longer necessary for the system's survival.
On the contrary, once the hard times are over the system will increase its
control over people and nature more rapidly, because it will no longer be
hampered by difficulties of the kind that it is currently experiencing.
Survival is not the principal motive for extending control. As we explained in
paragraphs 87-90, technicians and scientists carry on their work largely as a
surrogate activity; that is, they satisfy their need for power by solving
technical problems. They will continue to do this with unabated enthusiasm, and
among the most interesting and challenging problems for them to solve will be
those of understanding the human body and mind and intervening in their
development. For the "good of humanity," of course.
165. But suppose on the other hand that the stresses of the coming decades
prove to be too much for the system. If the system breaks down there may be a
period of chaos, a "time of troubles" such as those that history has recorded
at various epochs in the past. It is impossible to predict what would emerge
from such a time of troubles, but at any rate the human race would be given a
new chance. The greatest danger is that industrial society may begin to
reconstitute itself within the first few years after the breakdown. Certainly
there will be many people (power-hungry types espeeially) who will be anxious
to get the factories running again.
166. Therefore two tasks confront those who hate the servitude to which the
industrial system is reducing the human race. First, we must work to heighten
the social stresses within the system so as to increase the likelihood that it
will break down or be weakened sufficiently so that a revolution against it
becomes possible. Second, it is necessary to develop and propagate an ideology
that opposes technology and the industrial society if and when the system
becomes sufficiently weakened. And such an ideology will help to assure that,
if and when industrial society breaks down, its remnants will be smashed beyond
repair, so that the system cannot be reconstituted. The factories should be
destroyed, technical books burned, etc.

**** HUMAN SUFFERING ****
167. The industrial system will not break down purely as a result of
revolutionary action. It will not be vulnerable to revolutionary attack unless
its own internal problems of development lead it into very serious
difficulties. So if the system breaks down it will do so either spontaneously,
or through a process that is in part spontaneous but helped along by
revolutionaries. If the breakdown is sudden, many people will die, since the
world's population has become so overMown that it cannot even feed itself any
longer without advanced technology. Even if the breakdown is gradual enough so
that reduction of the population can occur more through lowering of the birth
rate than through elevation of the death rate, the process of de-
industrialization probably will be very chaotic and involve much suffering. It
is naive to think it likely that technology can be phased out in a smoothly
managed, orderly way, especially since the technophiles will fight stubbornly
at every step. Is it therefore cruel to work for the breakdown of the system?
Maybe, but maybe not. In the first place, revolutionaries will not be able to
break the system down unless it is already in enough trouble so that there
would be a good chance of its eventually breaking down by itself anyway; and
the bigger the system grows, the more disastrous the consequences of its
breakdown will be; so it may be that revolutionaries, by hastening the onset of
the breakdown, will be reducing the extent of the disaster.
168. In the second place, one has to balance struggle and death against the
loss of freedom and dignity. To many of us, freedom and dignity are more
important than a long life or avoidance of physical pain. Besides, we all have
to die some time, and it may be better to die fighting for survival, or for a
cause, than to live a long but empty and purposeless life.
169. In the third place, it is not at all certain that survival of the system
will lead to less suffering than breakdown of the system would. The system has
already caused, and is continuing to cause, immense suffering all over the
world. Ancient cultures, that for hundreds of years gave people a satisfactory
relationship with each other and with their environment, have been shattered by
contact with industrial society, and the result has been a whole catalogue of
economic, environmental, social and psychological problems. One of the effects
of the intrusion of industrial society has been that over much of the world
traditional controls on population have been thrown out of balance. Hence the
population explosion, with all that that implies. Then there is the
psychological suffering that is widespread throughout the supposedly fortunate
countries of the West (see paragraphs 44, 45). No one knows what will happen as
a result of ozone depletion, the greenhouse effect and other environmental
problems that cannot yet be foreseen. And, as nuclear proliferation has shown,
new technology cannot be kept out of the hands of dictators and irresponsible
Third World nations. Would you like to speculate about what Iraq or North Korea
will do with genetic engineering?
170. "Oh!" say the technophiles, "Science is going to fix all that! We will
conquer famine, eliminate psychological suffering, make everybody healthy and
happy!" Yeah, sure. That's what they said 200 years ago. The Industrial
Revolution was supposed to eliminate poverty, make everybody happy, etc. The
actual result has been quite different. The technophiles are hopelessly naive
(or self-deceiving) in their understanding of social problems. They are unaware
of (or choose to ignore) the fact that when large changes, even seemingly
beneficial ones, are introduced into a society, they lead to a long sequence of
other changes, most of which are impossible to predict (paragraph 103). The
result is disruption of the society. So it is very probable that in their
attempts to end poverty and disease, engineer docile, happy personalities and
so forth, the technophiles will create social systems that are terribly
troubled, even more so than the present once. For example, the scientists boast
that they will end famine by creating new, genetically engineered food plants.
But this will allow the human population to keep expanding indefinitely, and it
is well known that crowding leads to increased stress and aggression. This is
merely one example of the PREDICTABLE problems that will arise. We emphasize
that, as past experience has shown, technical progress will lead to other new
problems that CANNOT be predicted in advance (paragraph 103). In fact, ever
since the Industrial Revolution, technology has been creating new problems for
society far more rapidly than it has been solving old ones. Thus it will take a
long and difficult period of trial and error for the technophiles to work the
bugs out of their Brave New World (if they every do). In the meantime there
will be great suffering. So it is not at all clear that the survival of
industrial society would involve less suffering than the breakdown of that
society would. Technology has gotten the human race into a fix from which there
is not likely to be any easy escape.

**** THE FUTURE ****
171. But suppose now that industrial society does survive the next several
decades and that the bugs do eventually get worked out of the system, so that
it functions smoothly. What kind of system will it be? We will consider several
possibilities.
172. First let us postulate that the computer scientists succeed in developing
intelligent machines that can do all things better than human beings can do
them. In that case presumably all work will be done by vast, highly organized
systems of machines and no human effort will be necessary. Either of two cases
might occur. The machines might be permitted to make all of their own decisions
without human oversight, or else human control over the machines might be
retained.
173. If the machines are permitted to make all their own decisions, we can't
make any conjectures as to the results, because it is impossible to guess how
such machines might behave. We only point out that the fate of the human race
would be at the mercy of the machines. It might be argued that the human race
would never be foolish enough to hand over all power to the machines. But we
are suggesting neither that the human race would voluntarily turn power over to
the machines nor that the machines would willfully seize power. What we do
suggest is that the human race might easily permit itself to drift into a
position of such dependence on the machines that it would have no practical
choice but to accept all of the machines' decisions. As society and the
problems that face it become more and more complex and as machines become more
and more intelligent, people will let machines make more and more of their
decisions for them, simply because machine-made decisions will bring better
results than man-made ones. Eventually a stage may be reached at which the
decisions necessary to keep the system running will be so complex that human
beings will be incapable of making them intelligently. At that stage the
machines will be in effective control. People won't be able to just turn the
machine off, because they will be so dependent on them that turning them off
would amount to suicide.
174. On the other hand it is possible that human control over the machines may
be retained. In that case the average man may have control over certain private
machines of his own, such as his car or his personal computer, but control over
large systems of machines will be in the hands of a tiny elite -- just as it is
today, but with two differences. Due to improved techniques the elite will have
greater control over the masses; and because human work will no longer be
necessary the masses will be superfluous, a useless burden on the system. If
the elite is ruthless they may simply decide to exterminate the mass of
humanity. If they are humane they may use propaganda or other psychological or
biological techniques to reduce the birth rate until the mass of humanity
becomes extinct, leaving the world to the elite. Or, if the elite consists of
soft-hearted liberals, they may decide to play the role of good shepherds to
the rest of the human race. They will see to it that everyone's physical needs
are satisfied, that all children are raised under psychologically hygienic
conditions, that everyone has a wholesome hobby to keep him busy, and that
anyone who may become dissatisfied undergoes "treatment" to cure his "problem."
Of course, life will be so purposeless that people will have to be biologically
or psychologically engineered either to remove their need for the power process
or to make them "sublimate" their drive for power into some harmless hobby.
These engineered human beings may be happy in such a society, but they most
certainly will not be free. They will have been reduced to the status of
domestic animals.
175. But suppose now that the computer scientists do not succeed in developing
artificial intelligence, so that human work remains necessary. Even so,
machines will take care of more and more of the simpler tasks so that there
will be an increasing surplus of human workers at the lower levels of ability.
(We see this happening already. There are many people who find it difficult or
impossible to get work, because for intellectual or psychological reasons they
cannot acquire the level of training necessary to make themselves useful in the
present system.) On those who are employed, ever-increasing demands will be
placed: They will need more and more training, more and more ability, and will
have to be ever more reliable, conforming and docile, because they will be more
and more like cells of a giant organism. Their tasks will be increasingly
specialized, so that their work will be, in a sense, out of touch with the real
world, being concentrated on one tiny slice of reality. The system will have to
use any means that it can, whether psychological or biological, to engineer
people to be docile, to have the abilities that the system requires and to
"sublimate" their drive for power into some specialized task. But the statement
that the people of such a society will have to be docile may require
qualification. The society may find competitiveness useful, provided that ways
are found of directing competitiveness into channels that serve the needs of
the system. We can imagine a future society in which there is endless
competition for positions of prestige and power. But no more than a very few
people will ever reach the top, where the only real power is (see end of
paragraph 163). Very repellent is a society in which a person can satisfy his
need for power only by pushing large numbers of other people out of the way and
depriving them of THEIR opportunity for power.
176. One can envision scenarios that incorporate aspects of more than one of
the possibilities that we have just discussed. For instance, it may be that
machines will take over most of the work that is of real, practical importance,
but that human beings will be kept busy by being given relatively unimportant
work. It has been suggested, for example, that a great development of the
service industries might provide work for human beings. Thus people would spent
their time shining each other's shoes, driving each other around in taxicabs,
making handicrafts for one another, waihng on each other's tables, etc. This
seems to us a thoroughly contemptible way for the human race to end up, and we
doubt that many people would find fulfilling lives in such pointless busy-work.
They would seek other, dangerous outlets (drugs, crime, "cults," hate groups)
unless they were biologically or psychologically engineered to adapt them to
such a way of lffe.
177. Needless to say, the scenarios outlined above do not exhaust all the
possibilities. They only indicate the kinds of outcomes that seem to us most
likely. But we can envision no plausible scenarios that are any more palatable
than the ones we've just described. It is overwhelmingly probable that if the
industrial-technological system survives the next 40 to 100 years, it will by
that time have developed certain general characteristics: Individuals (at least
those of the "bourgeois" type, who are integrated into the system and make it
run, and who therefore have all the power) will be more dependent than ever on
large organizations; they will be more "socialized" than ever and their
physical and mental qualities to a significant extent (possibly to a very great
extent) will be those that are engineered into them rather than being the
results of chance (or of God's will, or whatever); and whatever may be left of
wild nature will be reduced to remnants preserved for scientific study and kept
under the supervision and management of scientists (hence it will no longer be
truly wild). In the long run (say a few centuries from now) it is likely that
neither the human race nor any other important organisms will exist as we know
them today, because once you start modifying organisms through genetic
engineering there is no reason to stop at any particular point, so that the
modifications will probably continue until man and other organisms have been
utterly transformed.
178. Whatever else may be the case, it is certain that technology is creating
for human beings a new physical and social environment radically different from
the spectrum of environments to which natural selection has adapted the human
race physically and psychologically. If man is not adjusted to this new
environment by being artificially re-engineered, then he will be adapted to it
through a long and painful process of natural selection. The former is far more
likely than the latter.
179. It would be better to dump the whole stinking system and take the
consequences.

**** STRATEGY ****
180. The technophiles are taking us all on an utterly reckless ride into the
unknown. Many people understand something of what technological progress is
doing to us yet take a passive attitude toward it because they think it is
inevitable. But we (FC) don't think it is inevitable. We think it can be
stopped, and we will give here some indications of how to go about stopping it.
181. As we stated in paragraph 166, the two main tasks for the present are to
promote social stress and instability in industrial society and to develop and
propagate an ideology that opposes technology and the industrial system. When
the system becomes sufficiently stressed and unstable, a revolution against
technology may be possible. The pattern would be similar to that of the French
and Russian Revolutions. French society and Russian society, for several
decades prior to their respective revolutions, showed increasing signs of
stress and weakness. Meanwhile, ideologies were being developed that offered a
new world view that was quite different from the old one. In the Russian case,
revolutionaries were actively working to undermine the old order. Then, when
the old system was put under sufficient additional stress (by financial crisis
in France, by military defeat in Russia) it was swept away by revolution. What
we propose is something along the same lines.
182. It will be objected that the French and Russian Revolutions were failures.
But most revolutions have two goals. One is to destroy an old form of society
and the other is to set up the new form of society envisioned by the
revolutionaries. The French and Russian revolutionaries failed (fortunately!)
to create the new kind of society of which they dreamed, but they were quite
successful in destroying the old society. We have no illusions about the
feasibility of creating a new, ideal form of society. Our goal is only to
destroy the existing form of society.
183. But an ideology, in order to gain enthusiastic support, must have a
positive ideal as well as a negative one; it must be FOR something as well as
AGAINST something. The positive ideal that we propose is Nature. That is, WILD
nature: those aspects of the functioning of the Earth and its living things
that are independent of human management and free of human interference and
control. And with wild nature we include human nature, by which we mean those
aspects of the functioning of the human individual that are not subject to
regulation by organized society but are products of chance, or free will, or
God (depending on your religious or philosophical opinions).
184. Nature makes a perfect counter-ideal to technology for several reasons.
Nature (that which is outside the power of the system) is the opposite of
technology (which seeks to expand indefinitely the power of the system). Most
people will agree that nature is beautiful; certainly it has tremendous popular
appeal. The radical environmentalists ALREADY hold an ideology that exalts
nature and opposes technology. [30] It is not necessary for the sake of nature
to set up some chimerical utopia or any new kind of social order. Nature takes
care of itself: It was a spontaneous creation that existed long before any
human society, and for countless centuries many different kinds of human
societies coexisted with nature without doing it an excessive amount of damage.
Only with the Industrial Revolution did the effect of human society on nature
become really devastating. To relieve the pressure on nature it is not
necessary to create a special kind of social system, it is only necessary to
get rid of industrial society. Granted, this will not solve all problems.
Industrial society has already done tremendous damage to nature and it will
take a very long time for the scars to heal. Besides, even preindustrial
societies can do significant damage to nature. Nevertheless, getting rid of
industrial society will accomplish a great deal. It will relieve the worst of
the pressure on nature so that the scars can begin to heal. It will remove the
capacity of organized society to keep increasing its control over nature
(including human nature). Whatever kind of society may exist after the demise
of the industrial system, it is certain that most people will live close to
nature, because in the absence of advanced technology there is no other way
that people CAN live. To feed themselves they must be peasants or herdsmen or
fishermen or hunters, etc. And, generally speaking, local autonomy should tend
to increase, because lack of advanced technology and rapid communications will
limit the capacity of governments or other large organizations to control local
communities.
185. As for the negative consequences of eliminating industrial society -
- well, you can't eat your cake and have it too. To gain one thing you have to
sacrifice another.
186. Most people hate psychological conflict. For this reason they avoid doing
any serious thinking about difficult social issues, and they like to have such
issues presented to them in simple, black-and-white terms: THIS is all good and
THAT is all bad. The revolutionary ideology should therefore be developed on
two levels.
187. On the more sophisticated level the ideology should address itself to
people who are intelligent, thoughtful and rational. The object should be to
create a core of people who will be opposed to the industrial system on a
rational, thought-out basis, with full appreciation of the problems and
ambiguities involved, and of the price that has to be paid for getting rid of
the system. It is particularly important to attract people of this type, as
they are capable people and will be instrumental in influencing others. These
people should be addressed on as rational a level as possible. Facts should
never intentionally be distorted and intemperate language should be avoided.
This does not mean that no appeal can be made to the emotions, but in making
such appeal care should be taken to avoid misrepresenting the truth or doing
anything else that would destroy the intellectual respectability of the
ideology.
188. On a second level, the ideology should be propagated in a simplified form
that will enable the unthinking majority to see the conflict of technology vs.
nature in unambiguous terms. But even on this second level the ideology should
not be expressed in language that is so cheap, intemperate or irrational that
it alienates people of the thoughfful and rational type. Cheap, intemperate
propaganda sometimes achieves impressive short-term gains, but it will be more
advantageous in the long run to keep the loyalty of a small number of
intelligently committed people than to arouse the passions of an unthinking,
fickle mob who will change their attitude as soon as someone comes along with a
better propaganda gimmick. However, propaganda of the rabble-rousing type may
be necessary when the system is nearing the point of collapse and there is a
final struggle between rival ideologies to determine which will become dominant
when the old world-view goes under.
189. Prior to that final struggle, the revolutionaries should not expect to
have a majority of people on their side. History is made by active, determined
minorities, not by the majority, which seldom has a clear and consistent idea
of what it really wants. Until the time comes for the final push toward
revolution [31], the task of revolutionaries will be less to win the shallow
support of the majority than to build a small core of deeply committed people.
As for the majority, it will be enough to make them aware of the existence of
the new ideology and remind them of it frequently; though of course it will be
desirable to get majority support to the extent that this can be done without
weakening the core of seriously committed people.
190. Any kind of social conflict helps to destabilize the system, but one
should be careful about what kind of conflict one encourages. The line of
conflict should be drawn between the mass of the people and the power-holding
elite of industrial society (politicians, scientists, upper-level business
executives, government officials, etc.). It should NOT be drawn between the
revolutionaries and the mass of the people. For example, it would be bad
strategy for the revolutionaries to condemn Americans for their habits of
consumption. Instead, the average American should be portrayed as a victim of
the advertising and marketing industry, which has suckered him into buying a
lot of junk that he doesn't need and that is very poor compensation for his
lost freedom. Either approach is consistent with the facts. It is merely a
matter of attitude whether you blame the advertising industry for manipulating
the public or blame the public for allowing itself to be manipulated. As a
matter of strategy one should generally avoid blaming the public.
191. One should think twice before encouraging any other social conflict than
that between the power-holding elite (which wields technology) and the general
public (over which technology exerts its power). For one thing, other conflicts
tend to distract attention from the important conflicts (between power-elite
and ordinary people, between technology and nature); for another thing, other
conflicts may actually tend to encourage technologization, because each side in
such a conflict wants to use technological power to gain advantages over its
adversary. This is clearly seen in rivalries between nations. It also appears
in ethnic conflicts within nations. For example, in America many black leaders
are anxious to gain power for African Americans by placing back individuals in
the technological power-elite. They want there to be many black government
officials, scientists, corporation executives and so forth. In this way they
are helping to absorb the African American subculture into the technological
system. Generally speaking, one should encourage only those social conflicts
that can be fitted into the framework of the conflicts of power-elite vs.
ordinary people, technology vs nature.
192. But the way to discourage ethnic conflict is NOT through militant advocacy
of minority rights (see paragraphs 21, 29). Instead, the revolutionaries should
emphasize that although minorities do suffer more or less disadvantage, this
disadvantage is of peripheral significance. Our real enemy is the industrial-
technological system, and in the struggle against the system, ethnic
distinctions are of no importance.
193. The kind of revolution we have in mind will not necessarily involve an
armed uprising against any government. It may or may not involve physical
violence, but it will not be a POLITICAL revolution. Its focus will be on
technology and economics, not politics. [32]
194. Probably the revolutionaries should even AVOID assuming political power,
whether by legal or illegal means, until the industrial system is stressed to
the danger point and has proved itself to be a failure in the eyes of most
people. Suppose for example that some "green" party should win control of the
United States Congress in an election. In order to avoid betraying or watering
down their own ideology they would have to take vigrous measures to turn
economic growth into economic shrinkage. To the average man the results would
appear disastrous: There would be massive unemployment, shortages of
commodities, etc Even if the grosser ill effects could be avoided through
superhumanly skillful management, still people would have to begin giving up
the luxuries to which they have become addicted. Dissatisfaction would grow,
the "green" party would be voted out o,f offfice and the revolutionaries would
have suffered a severe setback. For this reason the revolutionaries should not
try to acquire political power until the system has gotten itself into such a
mess that any hardships will be seen as resulting from the failures of the
industrial system itself and not from the policies of the revolutionaries. The
revolution against technology will probably have to be a revolution by
outsiders, a revolution from below and not from above.
195. The revolution must be international and worldwide. It cannot be carried
out on a nation-by-nation basis. Whenever it is suggested that the United
States, for example, should cut back on technological progress or economic
growth, people get hysterical and start screaming that if we fall behind in
technology the Japanese will get ahead of us. Holy robots! The world will fly
off its orbit if the Japanese ever sell more cars than we do! (Nationalism is a
great promoter of technology.) More reasonably, it is argued that if the
relatively democratic nations of the world fall behind in technology while
nasty, dictatorial nations like China, Vietnam and North Korea continue to
progress, eventually the dictators may come to dominate the world. That is why
the industrial system should be attacked in all nations simultaneously, to the
extent that this may be possible. True, there is no assurance that the
industrial system can be destroyed at approximately the same time all over the
world, and it is even conceivable that the attempt to overthrow the system
could lead instead to the domination of the system by dictators. That is a risk
that has to be taken. And it is worth taking, since the difference between a
"democratic" industrial system and one controlled by dictators is small
compared with the difference between an industrial system and a non-industrial
one. [33] It might even be argued that an industrial system controlled by
dictators would be preferable, because dictator-controlled systems usually have
proved ineffficient, hence they are presumably more likely to break down. Look
at Cuba.
196. Revolutionaries might consider favoring measures that tend to bind the
world economy into a unified whole. Free trade agreements like NAFTA and GATT
are probably harmful to the environment in the short run, but in the long run
they may perhaps be advantageous because they foster economic interdependence
between nations. It will be easier to destroy the industrial system on a
worldwide basis if the world economy is so unified that its breakdown in any
one major nation will lead to its breakdown in all industrialized nations.
197. Some people take the line that modern man has too much power, too much
control over nature; they argue for a more passive attitude on the part of the
human race. At best these people are expressing themselves unclearly, because
they fail to distinguish between power for LARGE ORGANIZATIONS and power for
INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS. It is a mistake to argue for powerlessness and
passivity, because people NEED power. Modern man as a collective entity -- that
is, the industrial system -- has immense power over nature, and we (FC) regard
this as evil. But modern INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS OF INDIVIDUALS have far
less power than primitive man ever did. Generally speaking, the vast power of
"modern man" over nature is exercised not by individuals or small groups but by
large organizations. To the extent that the average modern INDIVIDUAL can wield
the power of technology, he is permitted to do so only within narrow limits and
only under the supervision and control of the system. (You need a license for
everything and with the license come rules and regulations.) The individual has
only those technological powers with which the system chooses to provide him.
His PERSONAL power over nature is slight.
198. Primitive INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS actually had considerable power
over nature; or maybe it would be better to say power WITHIN nature. When
primitive man needed food he knew how to find and prepare edible roots, how to
track game and take it with homemade weapons. He knew how to protect himself
from heat cold, rain, dangerous animals, etc. But primitive man did relatively
little damage to nature because the COLLECTIVE power of primitive society was
negligible compared to the COLLECTIVE power of industrial society.
199. Instead of arguing for powerlessness and passivity, one should argue that
the power of the INDUSTRIAL SYSTEM should be broken, and that this will greatly
INCREASE the power and freedom of INDIVIDUALS and SMALL GROUPS.
200. Until the industrial system has been thoroughly wrecked, the destruction
of that system must be the revolutionaries' ONLY goal. Other goals would
distract attention and energy from the main goal. More importantly if the
revolutionaries permit themselves to have any other goal than the destruction
of technology, they will be tempted to use technology as a tool for reaching
that other goal. If they give in to that temptation, they will fall right back
into the technological trap, because modern technology is a unified, tightly
organized system, so that, in order to retain SOME technology, one finds
oneself obliged to retain MOST technology, hence one ends up sacrificing only
token amounts of technology.
201. Suppose for example that the revolutionaries took "social justice" as a
goal. Human nature being what it is, social justice would not come about
spontaneously; it would have to be enforced. In order to enforce it the
revolutionaries would have to retain central organization and control. For that
they would need rapid long-distance transportation and communication, and
therefore all the technology needed to support the transportation and
communication systems. To feed and clothe poor people they would have to use
agricultural and manufacturing technology. And so forth. So that the attempt to
insure social justice would force them to retain most parts of the
technological system. Not that we have anything against social justice, but it
must not be allowed to interfere with the effort to get rid of the
technological system.
202. It would be hopeless for revolutionaries to try to attack the system
without using SOME modern technology. If nothing else they must use the
communications media to spread their message. But they should use modern
technology for only ONE purpose: to attack the technological system.
203. Imagine an alcoholic sitting with a barrel of wine in front of him.
Suppose he starts saying to himself, "Wine isn't bad for you if used in
moderation. Why, they say small amounts of wine are even good for you! It won't
do me any harm if I take just one little drink...." Well you know what is going
to happen. Never forget that the human race with technology is just like an
alcoholic with a barrel of wine.
204. Revolutionaries should have as many children as they can. There is strong
scientific evidence that social attitudes are to a significant extent
inherited. No one suggests that a social attitude is a direct outcome of a
person's genetic constitution, but it appears that personality traits are
partly inherited and that certain personality traits tend, within the context
of our society, to make a person more likely to hold this or that social
attitude. Objections to these findings have been raised, but the objections are
feeble and seem to be ideologically motivated. In any event, no one denies that
children tend on the average to hold social attitudes similar to those of their
parents. From our point of view it doesn't matter all that much whether the
attitudes are passed on genetically or through childhood training. In either
case they ARE passed on.
205. The trouble is that many of the people who are inclined to rebel against
the industrial system are also concerned about the population problems, hence
they are apt to have few or no children. In this way they may be handing the
world over to the sort of people who support or at least accept the industrial
system. To insure the strength of the next generation of revolutionaries the
present generation should reproduce itself abundantly. In doing so they will be
worsening the population problem only slightly. And the important problem is to
get rid of the industrial system, because once the industrial system is gone
the world's population necessarily will decrease (see paragraph 167); whereas,
if the industrial system survives, it will continue developing new techniques
of food production that may enable the world's population to keep increasing
almost indefinitely.
206. With regard to revolutionary strategy, the only points on which we
absolutely insist are that the single overriding goal must be the elimination
of modern technology, and that no other goal can be allowed to compete with
this one. For the rest, revolutionaries should take an empirical approach. If
experience indicates that some of the recommendations made in the foregoing
paragraphs are not going to give good results, then those recommendations
should be discarded.

**** TWO KINDS OF TECHNOLOGY ****
207. An argument likely to be raised against our proposed revolution is that it
is bound to fail, because (it is claimed) throughout history technology has
always progressed, never regressed, hence technological regression is
impossible. But this claim is false.
208. We distinguish between two kinds of technology, which we will call
smallscale technology and organizationdependent technology. Small-scale
technology is technology that can be used by small-scale communities without
outside assistance. Organization-dependent technology is technology that
depends on large-scale social organization. We are aware of no significant
cases of regression in small-scale technology. But organization-dependent
technology DOES regress when the social organization on which it depends breaks
down. Example: When the Roman Empire fell apart the Romans' small-scale
technology survived because any clever village craftsman could build, for
instance, a water wheel, any skilled smith could make steel by Roman methods,
and so forth. But the Romans' organization- dependent technology DID regress.
Their aqueducts fell into disrepair and were never rebuilt. Their techniques of
road construction were lost. The Roman system of urban sanitation was
forgotten, so that not until rather recent times did the sanitation of European
cities equal that of Ancient Rome.
209. The reason why technology has seemed always to progress is that, until
perhaps a century or two before the Industrial Revolution, most technology was
small-scale technology. But most of the technology developed since the
Industrial Revolution is organizationdependent technology. Take the
refrigerator for example. Without factorymade parts or the facilities of a
postindustrial machine shop it would be virtually impossible for a handful of
local craftsmen to build a refrigerator. If by some miracle they did succeed in
building one it would be useless to them without a reliable source of electric
power. So they would have to dam a stream and build a generator. Generators
require large amounts of copper wire. Imagine trying to make that wire without
modern machinery. And where would they get a gas suitable for refrigeration? It
would be much easier to build an icehouse or preserve food by drying or
picking, as was done before the invention of the refrigerator.
210. So it is clear that if the industrial system were once thoroughly broken
down, refrigeration technology would quickly be lost. The same is true of other
organization-dependent technology. And once this technology had been lost for a
generation or so it would take centuries to rebuild it, just as it took
centuries to build it the first time around. Surviving technical books would be
few and scattered. An industrial society, if built from scratch without outside
help, can only be built in a series of stages: You need tools to make tools to
make tools to make tools ... . A long process of economic development and
progress in social organization is required. And, even in the absence of an
ideology opposed to technology, there is no reason to believe that anyone would
be interested in rebuilding industrial society. The enthusiasm for "progress"
is a phenomenon peculiar to the modern form of society, and it seems not to
have existed prior to the 17th century or thereabouts.
211. In the late Middle Ages there were four main civilizations that were about
equally "advanced": Europe, the Islamic world, India, and the Far East (China,
Japan, Korea). Three of those civilizations remained more or less stable, and
only Europe became dynamic. No one knows why Europe became dynamic at that
time; historians have their theories but these are only speculation. At any
rate, it is clear that rapid development toward a technological form of society
occurs only under special conditions. So there is no reason to assume that a
long-lasting technological regression cannot be brought about.
212. Would society EVENTUALLY develop again toward an industrial-technological
form? Maybe, but there is no use in worrying about it, since we can't predict
or control events 500 or 1,000 years in the future. Those problems must be
dealt with by the people who will live at that time.

**** THE DANGER OF LEFTISM ****
213. Because of their need for rebellion and for membership in a movement,
leftists or persons of similar psychological type often are unattracted to a
rebellious or activist movement whose goals and membership are not initially
leftist. The resulting influx of leftish types can easily turn a non-leftist
movement into a leftist one, so that leftist goals replace or distort the
original goals of the movement.
214. To avoid this, a movement that exalts nature and opposes technology must
take a resolutely anti-leftist stance and must avoid all collaboration with
leftists. Leftism is in the long run inconsistent with wild nature, with human
freedom and with the elimination of modern technology. Leftism is collectivist;
it seeks to bind together the entire world (both nature and the human race)
into a unified whole. But this implies management of nature and of human life
by organized society, and it requires advanced technology. You can't have a
united world without rapid transportation and communication, you can't make all
people love one another without sophisticated psychological techniques, you
can't have a "planned society" without the necessary technological base. Above
all, leftism is driven by the need for power, and the leftist seeks power on a
collective basis, through identification with a mass movement or an
organization. Leftism is unlikely ever to give up technology, because
technology is too valuable a source of collective power.
215. The anarchist [34] too seeks power, but he seeks it on an individual or
small-group basis; he wants individuals and small groups to be able to control
the circumstances of their own lives. He opposes technology because it makes
small groups dependent on large organizations.
216. Some leftists may seem to oppose technology, but they will oppose it only
so long as they are outsiders and the technological system is controlled by
non-leftists. If leftism ever becomes dominant in society, so that the
technological system becomes a tool in the hands of leftists, they will
enthusiastically use it and promote its growth. In doing this they will be
repeating a pattern that leftism has shown again and again in the past. When
the Bolsheviks in Russia were outsiders, they vigorously opposed censorship and
the secret police, they advocated self-determination for ethnic minorities, and
so forth; but as soon as they came into power themselves, they imposed a
tighter censorship and created a more ruthless secret police than any that had
existed under the tsars, and they oppressed ethnic minorities at least as much
as the tsars had done. In the United States, a couple of decades ago when
leftists were a minority in our universities, leftist professors were vigorous
proponents of academic freedom, but today, in those of our universities where
leftists have become dominant, they have shown themselves ready to take away
from everyone else's academic freedom. (This is "political correctness.") The
same will happen with leftists and technology: They will use it to oppress
everyone else if they ever get it under their own control.
217. In earlier revolutions, leftists of the most power-hungry type,
repeatedly, have first cooperated with non-leftist revolutionaries, as well as
with leftists of a more libertarian inclination, and later have double-crossed
them to seize power for themselves. Robespierre did this in the French
Revolution, the Bolsheviks did it in the Russian Revolution, the communists did
it in Spain in 1938 and Castro and his followers did it in Cuba. Given the past
history of leftism, it would be utterly foolish for non-leftist revolutionaries
today to collaborate with leftists.
218. Various thinkers have pointed out that leftism is a kind of religion.
Leftism is not a religion in the strict sense because leftist doctrine does not
postulate the existence of any supernatural being. But, for the leftist,
leftism plays a psychological role much like that which religion plays for some
people. The leftist NEEDS to believe in leftism; it plays a vital role in his
psychological economy. His beliefs are not easily modified by logic or facts.
He has a deep conviction that leftism is morally Right with a capital R, and
that he has not only a right but a duty to impose leftist morality on everyone.
(However, many of the people we are referring to as "leftists" do not think of
themselves as leftists and would not describe their system of beliefs as
leftism. We use the term "leftism" because we don't know of any better words to
designate the spectrum of related creeds that includes the feminist, gay
rights, political correctness, etc., movements, and because these movements
have a strong affinity with the old left. See paragraphs 227-230.)
219. Leftism is a totalitarian force. Wherever leftism is in a position of
power it tends to invade every private corner and force every thought into a
leftist mold. In part this is because of the quasi-religious character of
leftism; everything contrary to leftist beliefs represents Sin. More
importantly, leftism is a totalitarian force because of the leftists' drive for
power. The leftist seeks to satisfy his need for power through identification
with a social movement and he tries to go through the power process by helping
to pursue and attain the goals of the movement (see paragraph 83). But no
matter how far the movement has gone in attaining its goals the leftist is
never satisfied, because his activism is a surrogate activity (see paragraph
41). That is, the leftist's real motive is not to attain the ostensible goals
of leftism; in reality he is motivated by the sense of power he gets from
struggling for and then reaching a social goal. [35] Consequently the leftist
is never satisfied with the goals he has already attained; his need for the
power process leads him always to pursue some new goal. The leftist wants equal
opportunities for minorities. When that is attained he insists on statistical
equality of achievement by minorities. And as long as anyone harbors in some
corner of his mind a negative attitude toward some minority, the leftist has to
re-educated him. And ethnic minorities are not enough; no one can be allowed to
have a negative attitude toward homosexuals, disabled people, fat people, old
people, ugly people, and on and on and on. It's not enough that the public
should be informed about the hazards of smoking; a warning has to be stamped on
every package of cigarettes. Then cigarette advertising has to be restricted ff
not banned. The activists will never be satisfied until tobacco is outlawed,
and after that it will be alcohol, then junk food, etc. Activists have fought
gross child abuse, which is reasonable. But now they want to stop all spanking.
When they have done that they will want to ban something else they consider
unwholesome, then another thing and then another. They will never be satisfied
until they have complete control over all child rearing practices. And then
they will move on to another cause.
220. Suppose you asked leftists to make a list of ALL the things that were
wrong with society, and then suppose you instituted EVERY social change that
they demanded. It is safe to say that within a couple of years the majority of
leftists would find something new to complain about, some new social "evil" to
correct because, once again, the leftist is motivated less by distress at
society's ills than by the need to satisfy his drive for power by imposing his
solutions on society.
221. Because of the restrictions placed on their thoughts and behavior by their
high level of socialization, many leftists of the over-socialized type cannot
pursue power in the ways that other people do. For them the drive for power has
only one morally acceptable outlet, and that is in the struggle to impose their
morality on everyone.
222. Leftists, especially those of the oversocialized type, are True Believers
in the sense of Eric Hoffer's book, "The True Believer." But not all True
Believers are of the same psychological type as leftists. Presumably a true-
believing nazi, for instance, is very different psychologically from a true-
believing leftist. Because of their capacity for single-minded devotion to a
cause, True Believers are a useful, perhaps a necessary, ingredient of any
revolutionary movement. This presents a problem with which we must admit we
don't know how to deal. We aren't sure how to harness the energies of the True
Believer to a revolution against technology. At present all we can say is that
no True Believer will make a safe recruit to the revolution unless his
commitment is exclusively to the destruction of technology. If he is committed
also to another ideal, he may want to use technology as a tool for pursuing
that other ideal (see paragraphs 220, 221).
223. Some readers may say, "This stuff about leftism is a lot of crap. I know
John and Jane who are leftish types and they don't have all these totalitarian
tendencies." It's quite true that many leftists, possibly even a numerical
majority, are decent people who sincerely believe in tolerating others' values
(up to a point) and wouldn't want to use high-handed methods to reach their
social goals. Our remarks about leftism are not meant to apply to every
individual leftist but to describe the general character of leftism as a
movement. And the general character of a movement is not necessarily determined
by the numerical proportions of the various kinds of people involved in the
movement.
224. The people who rise to positions of power in leftist movements tend to be
leftists of the most power-hungry type, because power-hungry people are those
who strive hardest to get into positions of power. Once the power-hungry types
have captured control of the movement, there are many leftists of a gentler
breed who inwardly disapprove of many of the actions of the leaders, but cannot
bring themselves to oppose them. They NEED their faith in the movement, and
because they cannot give up this faith they go along with the leaders. True,
SOME leftists do have the guts to oppose the totalitarian tendencies that
emerge, but they generally lose, because the power-hungry types are better
organized, are more ruthless and Machiavellian and have taken care to build
themselves a strong power base.
225. These phenomena appeared clearly in Russia and other countries that were
taken over by leftists. Similarly, before the breakdown of communism in the,
USSR, leftish types in the West would, seldom criticize that country. If
prodded they would admit that the USSR did many wrong things, but then they
would try to find excuses for the communists and begin talking about the faults
of the West. They always opposed Western military resistance to communist
aggression. Leftish types all over the world vigorously protested the U.S.
military action in Vietnam, but when the USSR invaded Afghanistan they did
nothing. Not that they approved of the Soviet actions; but because of their
leftist faith, they just couldn't bear to put themselves in opposition to
communism. Today, in those of our universities where "political correctness"
has become dominant, there are probably many leftish types who privately
disapprove of the suppression of academic freedom, but they go along with it
anyway.
226. Thus the fact that many individual leftists are personally mild and fairly
tolerant people by no means prevents leftism as a whole form having a
totalitarian tendency.
227. Our discussion of leftism has a serious weakness. It is still far from
clear what we mean by the word "leftist." There doesn't seem to be much we can
do about this. Today leftism is fragmented into a whole spectrum of activist
movements. Yet not all activist movements are leftist, and some activist
movements (e.g., radical environmentalism) seem to include both personalities
of the leftist type and personalities of thoroughly un-leftist types who ought
to know better than to collaborate with leftists. Varieties of leftists fade
out gradually into varieties of non-leftists and we ourselves would often be
hard-pressed to decide whether a given individual is or is not a leftist. To
the extent that it is defined at all, our conception of leftism is defined by
the discussion of it that we have given in this article, and we can only advise
the reader to use his own judgment in deciding who is a leftist.
228. But it will be helpful to list some criteria for diagnosing leftism. These
criteria cannot be applied in a cut and dried manner. Some individuals may meet
some of the criteria without being leftists, some leftists may not meet any of
the criteria. Again, you just have to use your judgment.
229. The leftist is oriented toward large-scale collectivism. He emphasizes the
duty of the individual to serve society and the duty of society to take care of
the individual. He has a negative attitude toward individualism. He often takes
a moralistic tone. He tends to be for gun control, for sex education and other
psychologically "enlightened" educational methods, for social planning, for
affirmative action, for multi- culturalism. He tends to identify with victims.
He tends to be against competition and against violence, but he ofte finds
excuses for those leftists who do commit violence. He is fond of using the
common catch-phrases of the left, like "racism," "sexism," "homophobia,"
"capitalism," "imperialism," "neocolonialism," "genocide," "social change,"
"social justice," "social responsibility." Maybe the best diagnostic trait of
the leftist is his tendency to sympathize with the following movements:
feminism, gay rights, ethnic rights, disability rights, animal rights,
political correctness. Anyone who strongly sympathizes with ALL of these
movements is almost certainly a leftist. [36]
230. The more dangerous leftists, that is, those who are most power-hungry, are
often characterized by arrogance or by a dogmatic approach to ideology.
However, the most dangerous leftists of all may be certain oversocialized types
who avoid irritating displays of aggressiveness and refrain from advertising
their leftism, but work quietly and unobtrusively to promote collectivist
values, "enlightened" psychological techniques for socializing children,
dependence of the individual on the system, and so forth. These crypto-leftists
(as we may call them) approximate certain bourgeois types as far as practical
action is concerned, but differ from them in psychology, ideology and
motivation. The ordinary bourgeois tries to bring people under control of the
system in order to protect his way of life, or he does so simply because his
attitudes are conventional. The crypto-leftist tries to bring people under
control of the system because he is a True Believer in a collectivistic
ideology. The crypto-leftist is differentiated from the average leftist of the
oversocialized type by the fact that his rebellious impulse is weaker and he is
more securely socialized. He is differentiated from the ordinary well-
socialized bourgeois by the fact that there is some deep lack within him that
makes it necessary for him to devote himself to a cause and immerse himself in
a collectivity. And maybe his (well-sublimated) drive for power is stronger
than that of the average bourgeois.

**** FINAL NOTE ****
231. Throughout this article we've made imprecise statements and statements
that ought to have had all sorts of qualifications and reservations attached to
them; and some of our statements may be flatly false. Lack of sufficient
information and the need for brevity made it impossible for us to formulate our
assertions more precisely or add all the necessary qualifications. And of
course in a discussion of this kind one must rely heavily on intuitive
judgment, and that can sometimes be wrong. So we don't claim that this article
expresses more than a crude approximation to the truth.
232. All the same, we are reasonably confident that the general outlines of the
picture we have painted here are roughly correct. Just one possible weak point
needs to be mentioned. We have portrayed leftism in its modern form as a
phenomenon peculiar to our time and as a symptom of the disruption of the power
process. But we might possibly be wrong about this. Oversocialized types who
try to satisfy their drive for power by imposing their morality on everyone
have certainly been around for a long time. But we THINK that the decisive role
played by feelings of inferiority, low self-esteem, powerlessness,
identification with victims by people who are not themselves victims, is a
peculiarity of modern leftism. Identification with victims by people not
themselves victims can be seen to some extent in 19th century leftism and early
Christianity but as far as we can make out, symptoms of low self-esteem, etc.,
were not nearly so evident in these movements, or in any other movements, as
they are in modern leftism. But we are not in a position to assert confidently
that no such movements have existed prior to modern leftism. This is a
significant question to which historians ought to give their attention.
**** NOTES ****
1. (Paragraph 19) We are asserting that ALL, or even most, bullies and ruthless
competitors suffer from feelings of inferiority.
2. (Paragraph 25) During the Victorian period many oversocialized people
suffered from serious psychological problems as a result of repressing or
trying to repress their sexual feelings. Freud apparently based his theories on
people of this type. Today the focus of socialization has shifted from sex to
aggression.
3. (Paragraph 27) Not necessarily including specialists in engineering or the
"hard" sciences.
4. (Paragraph 28) There are many individuals of the middle and upper classes
who resist some of these values, but usually their resistance is more or less
covert. Such resistance appears in the mass media only to a very limited
extent. The main thrust of propaganda in our society is in favor of the stated
values. The main reason why these values have become, so to speak, the official
values of our society is that they are useful to the industrial system.
Violence is discouraged because it disrupts the functioning of the system.
Racism is discouraged because ethnic conflicts also disrupt the system, and
discrimination wastes the talents of minority-group members who could be useful
to the system. Poverty must be "cured" because the underclass causes problems
for the system and contact with the underclass lowers the morale of the other
classes. Women are encouraged to have careers because their talents are useful
to the system and, more importantly, because by having regular jobs women
become better integrated into the system and tied directly to it rather than to
their families. This helps to weaken family solidarity. (The leaders of the
system say they want to strengthen the family, but they really mean is that
they want the family to serve as an effective tool for socializing children in
accord with the needs of the system. We argue in paragraphs 51, 52 that the
system cannot afford to let the family or other small-scale social groups be
strong or autonomous.)
5. (Paragraph 42) It may be argued that the majority of people don't want to
make their own decisions but want leaders to do their thinking for them. There
is an element of truth in this. People like to make their own decisions in
small matters, but making decisions on difficult, fundamental questions
requires facing up to psychological conflict, and most people hate
psychological conflict. Hence they tend to lean on others in making difficult
decisions. But it does not follow that they like to have decisions imposed upon
them without having any opportunity to influence those decisions. The majority
of people are natural followers, not leaders, but they like to have direct
personal access to their leaders, they want to be able to influence the leaders
and participate to some extent in making even the difficult decisions. At least
to that degree they need autonomy.
6. (Paragraph 44) Some of the symptoms listed are similar to those shown by
caged animals. To explain how these symptoms arise from deprivation with
respect to the power process: õommon-sense understanding of human nature tells
one that lack of goals whose attainment requires effort leads to boredom and
that boredom, long continued, often leads eventually to depression. Failure to
attain goals leads to frustration and lowering of self-esteem. Frustration
leads to anger, anger to aggression, often in the form of spouse or child
abuse. It has been shown that long-continued frustration commonly leads to
depression and that depression tends to cause guilt, sleep disorders, eating
disorders and bad feelings about oneself. Those who are tending toward
depression seek pleasure as an antidote; hence insatiable hedonism and
excessive sex, with perversions as a means of getting new kicks. Boredom too
tends to cause excessive pleasure-seeking since, lacking other goals, people
often use pleasure as a goal. See accompanying diagram.
The foregoing is a simplification. Reality is more complex, and of course,
deprivation with respect to the power process is not the ONLY cause of the
symptoms described. By the way, when we mention depression we do not
necessarily mean depression that is severe enough to be treated by a
psychiatrist. Often only mild forms of depression are involved. And when we
speak of goals we do not necessarily mean long-term, thoughtout goals. For many
or most people through much of human history, the goals of a hand-to-mouth
existence (merely providing oneself and one's family with food from day to day)
have been quite sufficient.
7. (Paragraph 52) A partial exception may be made for a few passive,
inwardlooking groups, such as the Amish, which have little effect on the wider
society. Apart from these, some genuine small-scale communities do exist in
America today. For instance, youth gangs and "cults." Everyone regards them as
dangerous, and so they are, because the members of these groups are loyal
primarily to one another rather than to the system, hence the system cannot
control them. Or take the gypsies. The gypsies commonly get away with theft and
fraud because their loyalties are such that they can always get other gypsies
to give testimony that "proves" their innocence. Obviously the system would be
in serious trouble if too many people belonged to such groups. Some of the
early-20th century Chinese thinkers who were concerned with modernizing China
recognized the necessity breaking down small-scale social groups such as the
family: "(According to Sun Yat-sen) the Chinese people needed a new surge of
patriotism, which would lead to a transfer of loyalty from the family to the
state.... (According to Li Huang) traditional attachments, particularly to the
family had to be abandoned if nationalism were to develop in China." (Chester
C. Tan, "Chinese Political Thought in the Twentieth Century," page 125, page
297.)
8. (Paragraph 56) Yes, we know that 19th century America had its problems, and
serious ones, but for the sake of brevity we have to express ourselves in
simplified terms.
9. (Paragraph 61) We leave aside the "underclass." We are speaking of the
mainstream.
10. (Paragraph 62) Some social scientists, educators, "mental health"
professionals and the like are doing their best to push the social drives into
group 1 by trying to see to it that everyone has a satisfactory social life.
11. (Paragraphs 63, 82) Is the drive for endless material acquisition really an
artificial creation of the advertising and marketing industry? Certainly there
is no innate human drive for material acquisition. There have been many
cultures in which people have desired little material wealth beyond what was
necessary to satisfy their basic physical needs (Australian aborigines,
traditional Mexican peasant culture, some African cultures). On the other hand
there have also been many pre-industrial cultures in which material acquisition
has played an important role. So we can't claim that today's acquisition-
oriented culture is exclusively a creation of the advertising and marketing
industry. But it is clear that the advertising and marketing industry has had
an important part in creating that culture. The big corporations that spend
millions on advertising wouldn't be spending that kind of money without solid
proof that they were getting it back in increased sales. One member of FC met a
sales manager a couple of years ago who was frank enough to tell him, "Our job
is to make people buy things they don't want and don't need." He then described
how an untrained novice could present people with the facts about a product,
and make no sales at all, while a trained and experienced professional salesman
would make lots of sales to the same people. This shows that people are
manipulated into buying things they don't really want.
12. (Paragraph 64) The problem of purposelessness seems to have become less
serious during the last 15 years or so, because people now feel less secure
physically and economically than they did earlier, and the need for security
provides them with a goal. But purposelessness has been replaced by frustration
over the difficulty of attaining security. We emphasize the problem of
purposelessness because the liberals and leftists would wish to solve our
social problems by having society guarantee everyone's security; but if that
could be done it would only bring back the problem of purposelessness. The real
issue is not whether society provides well or poorly for people's security; the
trouble is that people are dependent on the system for their security rather
than having it in their own hands. This, by the way, is part of the reason why
some people get worked up about the right to bear arms; possession of a gun
puts that aspect of their security in their own hands.
13. (Paragraph 66) Conservatives' efforts to decrease the amount of government
regulation are of little benefit to the average man. For one thing, only a
fraction of the regulations can be eliminated because most regulations are
necessary. For another thing, most of the deregulation affects business rather
than the average individual, so that its main effect is to take power from the
government and give it to private corporations. What this means for the average
man is that government interference in his life is replaced by interference
from big corporations, which may be permitted, for example, to dump more
chemicals that get into his water supply and give him cancer. The conservatives
are just taking the average man for a sucker, exploiting his resentment of Big
Government to promote the power of Big Business.
14. (Paragraph 73) When someone approves of the purpose for which propaganda is
being used in a given case, he generally calls it "education" or applies to it
some similar euphemism. But propaganda is propaganda regardless of the purpose
for which it is used.
15. (Paragraph 83) We are not expressing approval or disapproval of the Panama
invasion. We only use it to illustrate a point.
16. (Paragraph 95) When the American colonies were under British rule there
were fewer and less effective legal guarantees of freedom than there were after
the American Constitution went into effect, yet there was more personal freedom
in pre-industrial America, both before and after the War of Independence, than
there was after the Industrial Revolution took hold in this country. We quote
from "Violence in America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives," edited by
Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr, Chapter 12 by Roger Lane, pages 476-478:
"The progressive heightening of standards of propriety, and with it the
increasing reliance on official law enforcement (in l9th century America) ...
were common to the whole society.... [T]he change in social behavior is so long
term and so widespread as to suggest a connection with the most fundamental of
contemporary social processes; that of industrial urbanization
itself...."Massachusetts in 1835 had a population of some 660,940, 81 percent
rural, overwhelmingly preindustrial and native born. It's citizens were used to
considerable personal freedom. Whether teamsters, farmers or artisans, they
were all accustomed to setting their own schedules, and the nature of their
work made them physically independent of each other.... Individual problems,
sins or even crimes, were not generally cause for wider social concern...."But
the impact of the twin movements to the city and to the factory, both just
gathering force in 1835, had a progressive effect on personal behavior
throughout the 19th century and into the 20th. The factory demanded regularity
of behavior, a life governed by obedience to the rhythms of clock and calendar,
the demands of foreman and supervisor. In the city or town, the needs of living
in closely packed neighborhoods inhibited many actions previously
unobjectionable. Both blue- and white-collar employees in larger establishments
were mutually dependent on their fellows; as one man's work fit into anther's,
so one man's business was no longer his own. "The results of the new
organization of life and work were apparent by 1900, when some 76 percent of
the 2,805,346 inhabitants of Massachusetts were classified as urbanites. Much
violent or irregular behavior which had been tolerable in a casual, independent
society was no longer acceptable in the more formalized, cooperative atmosphere
of the later period.... The move to the cities had, in short, produced a more
tractable, more socialized, more 'civilized' generation than its predecessors."
17. (Paragraph 117) Apologists for the system are fond of citing cases in which
elections have been decided by one or two votes, but such cases are rare.
18. (Paragraph 119) "Today, in technologically advanced lands, men live very
similar lives in spite of geographical, religious, and political differences.
The daily lives of a Christian bank clerk in Chicago, a Buddhist bank clerk in
Tokyo, and a Communist bank clerk in Moscow are far more alike than the life of
any one of them is like that of any single man who lived a thousand years ago.
These similarities are the result of a common technology...." L. Sprague de
Camp, "The Ancient Engineers," Ballantine edition, page 17. The lives of the
three bank clerks are not IDENTICAL. Ideology does have SOME effect. But all
technological societies, in order to survive, must evolve along APPROXIMATELY
the same trajectory.
19. (Paragraph 123) Just think an irresponsible genetic engineer might create a
lot of terrorists.
20. (Paragraph 124) For a further example of undesirable consequences of
medical progress, suppose a reliable cure for cancer is discovered. Even if the
treatment is too expensive to be available to any but the elite, it will
greatly reduce their incentive to stop the escape of carcinogens into the
environment.
21. (Paragraph 128) Since many people may find paradoxical the notion that a
large number of good things can add up to a bad thing, we illustrate with an
analogy. Suppose Mr. A is playing chess with Mr. B. Mr. C, a Grand Master, is
looking over Mr. A's shoulder. Mr. A of course wants to win his game, so if Mr.
C points out a good move for him to make, he is doing Mr. A a favor. But
suppose now that Mr. C tells Mr. A how to make ALL of his moves. In each
particular instance he does Mr. A a favor by showing him his best move, but by
making ALL of his moves for him he spoils his game, since there is not point in
Mr. A's playing the game at all if someone else makes all his moves. The
situation of modern man is analogous to that of Mr. A. The system makes an
individual's life easier for him in innumerable ways, but in doing so it
deprives him of control over his own fate.
22. (Paragraph 137) Here we are considering only the conflict of values within
the mainstream. For the sake of simplicity we leave out of the picture
"outsider" values like the idea that wild nature is more important than human
economic welfare.
23. (Paragraph 137) Self-interest is not necessarily MATERIAL self-interest. It
can consist in fulfillment of some psychological need, for example, by
promoting one's own ideology or religion.
24. (Paragraph 139) A qualification: It is in the interest of the system to
permit a certain prescribed degree of freedom in some areas. For example,
economic freedom (with suitable limitations and restraints) has proved
effective in promoting economic growth. But only planned, circumscribed,
limited freedom is in the interest of the system. The individual must always be
kept on a leash, even if the leash is sometimes long (see paragraphs 94, 97).
25. (Paragraph 143) We don't mean to suggest that the efficiency or the
potential for survival of a society has always been inversely proportional to
the amount of pressure or discomfort to which the society subjects people. That
certainly is not the case. There is good reason to believe that many primitive
societies subjected people to less pressure than European society did, but
European society proved far more efficient than any primitive society and
always won out in conflicts with such societies because of the advantages
conferred by technology.
26. (Paragraph 147) If you think that more effective law enforcement is
unequivocally good because it suppresses crime, then remember that crime as
defined by the system is not necessarily what YOU would call crime. Today,
smoking marijuana is a "crime," and, in some places in the U.S., so is
possession of an unregistered handgun. Tomorrow, possession of ANY firearm,
registered or not, may be made a crime, and the same thing may happen with
disapproved methods of child-rearing, such as spanking. In some countries,
expression of dissident political opinions is a crime, and there is no
certainty that this will never happen in the U.S., since no constitution or
political system lasts forever. If a society needs a large, powerful law
enforcement establishment, then there is something gravely wrong with that
society; it must be subjecting people to severe pressures if so many refuse to
follow the rules, or follow them only because forced. Many societies in the
past have gotten by with little or no formal law-enforcement.
27. (Paragraph 151) To be sure, past societies have had means of influencing
human behavior, but these have been primitive and of low effectiveness compared
with the technological means that are now being developed.
28. (Paragraph 152) However, some psychologists have publicly expressed
opinions indicating their contempt for human freedom. And the mathematician
Claude Shannon was quoted in Omni (August 1987) as saying, "I visualize a time
when we will be to robots what dogs are to humans, and I'm rooting for the
machines."
29. (Paragraph 154) This is no science fiction! After writing paragraph 154 we
came across an article in Scientific American according to which scientists are
actively developing techniques for identffying possible future criminals and
for treating them by a combination of biological and psychological means. Some
scientists advocate compulsory application of the treatment, which may be
available in the near future. (See "Seeking the Criminal Element," by W. Wayt
Gibbs, Scientific American, March 1995.) Maybe you think this is OK because the
treatment would be applied to those who might become violent criminals. But of
course it won't stop there. Next, a treatment will be applied to those who
might become drunk drivers (they endanger human life too), then perhaps to peel
who spank their children, then to environmentalists who sabotage logging
equipment, eventually to anyone whose behavior is inconvenient for the system.
30. (Paragraph 184) A further advantage of nature as a counter-ideal to
technology is that, in many people, nature inspires the kind of reverence that
is associated with religion, so that nature could perhaps be idealized on a
religious basis. It is true that in many societies religion has served as a
support and justification for the established order, but it is also true that
religion has often provided a basis for rebellion. Thus it may be useful to
introduce a religious element into the rebellion against technology, the more
so because Western society today has no strong religious foundation. Religion,
nowadays either is used as cheap and transparent support for narrow, short-
sighted selfishness (some conservatives use it this way), or even is cynically
exploited to make easy money (by many evangelists), or has degenerated into
crude irrationalism (fundamentalist protestant sects, "cults"), or is simply
stagnant (Catholicism, main-line Protestantism). The nearest thing to a strong,
widespread, dynamic religion that the West has seen in recent times has been
the quasi-religion of leftism, but leftism today is fragmented and has no
clear, unified, inspiring goal. Thus there is a religious vacuum in our society
that could perhaps be filled by a religion focused on nature in opposition to
technology. But it would be a mistake to try to concoct artificially a religion
to fill this role. Such an invented religion would probably be a failure. Take
the "Gaia" religion for example. Do its adherents REALLY believe in it or are
they just play-acting? If they are just play-acting their religion will be a
flop in the end. It is probably best not to try to introduce religion into the
conflict of nature vs. technology unless you REALLY believe in that religion
yourself and find that it arouses a deep, strong, genuine response in many
other people.
31. (Paragraph 189) Assuming that such a final push occurs. Conceivably the
industrial system might be eliminated in a somewhat gradual or piecemeal
fashion (see paragraphs 4, 167 and Note 4).
32. (Paragraph 193) It is even conceivable (remotely) that the revolution might
consist only of a massive change of attitudes toward technology resulting in a
relatively gradual and painless disintegration of the industrial system. But if
this happens we'll be very lucky. It's far more probably that the transition to
a nontechnological society will be very difficult and full of conflicts and
disasters.
33. (Paragraph 195) The economic and technological structure of a society are
far more important than its political structure in determining the way the
average man lives (see paragraphs 95, 119 and Notes 16, 18).
34. (Paragraph 215) This statement refers to our particular brand of anarchism.
A wide variety of social attitudes have been called "anarchist," and it may be
that many who consider themselves anarchists would not accept our statement of
paragraph 215. It should be noted, by the way, that there is a nonviolent
anarchist movement whose members probably would not accept FC as anarchist and
certainly would not approve of FC's violent methods.
35. (Paragraph 219) Many leftists are motivated also by hostility, but the
hostility probably results in part from a frustrated need for power.
36. (Paragraph 229) It is important to understand that we mean someone who
sympathizes with these MOVEMENTS as they exist today in our society. One who
believes that women, homosexuals, etc., should have equal rights is not
necessary a leftist. The feminist, gay rights, etc., movements that exist in
our society have the particular ideological tone that characterizes leftism,
and if one believes, for example, that women should have equal rights it does
not necessarily follow that one must sympathize with the feminist movement as
it exists today.
If copyright problems make it impossible for this long quotation to be printed,
then please change Note 16 to read as follows:
16. (Paragraph 95) When the American colonies were under British rule there
were fewer and less effective legal guarantees of freedom than there were after
the American Constitution went into effect, yet there was more personal freedom
in pre-industrial America, both before and after the War of Independence, than
there was after the Industrial Revolution took hold in this country. In
"Violence in America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives," edited by Hugh
Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr, Chapter 12 by Roger Lane, it is explained how
in pre-industrial America the average person had greater independence and
autonomy than he does today, and how the process of industrialization
necessarily led to the restriction of personal freedom.
===============================================================================
return_to_1st_part_of_manifesto
return_to_Unabom_homepage
_______________________________________________________
[[Verbal approximation The Washington Post graphic.]]
DIAGRAM OF SYMPTOMS RESULTING FROM DISRUPTION OF THE POWER PROCESS
LACK OF GOALS WHOSE ATTAINMENT REQUIRES EFFORT [[box]] linked to Boredom which
is linked to Excessive pleasure-seeking and both linked are to Tendency to
depression.
Excessive pleasure-seeking linked to Insatiable hedonis, Sexual perversion and
Overeating.
Tendency to depression [[center of diagram spoke]] linked to Frustration linked
to FAILURE TO ATTAIN GOALS [[box]].
Tendency to depression linked to Eating disorders, Sleep disorders, Guilt,
Anxiety and Low self-esteem.
Frustration linked to Anger which is linked to Abuse.
FAILURE TO ATTAIN GOALS linked to Low self-esteem.
